SECTION 215

"'Bhishma said, "Living creatures, by being attached to objects of the senses which are always fraught with evil, become helpless. Those high-souled persons, however, who are not attached to them, attain to the highest end. The man of intelligence, beholding the world over-whelmed with the evils constituted by birth, death, decrepitude, sorrow, disease, and anxieties, should exert themselves for the attainment of Emancipation. He should be pure in speech, thought, and body; he should be free from pride. Of tranquil soul and possessed of knowledge, he should lead a life of mendicancy, and pursue happiness without being attached to any worldly object. Again, if attachment be seen to possess the mind in consequence of compassion to creatures, he should, seeing that the universe is the result of acts, show indifference in respect of compassion itself.[755] Whatever good acts are performed, or whatever sin (is perpetrated), the doer tastes the consequences. Hence, one should, in speech, thought, and deed, do only acts that are good.[756] He succeeds in obtaining happiness who practises abstention from injuring (others), truthfulness of speech, honesty towards all creatures, and forgiveness, and who is never heedless. Hence one, exercising one's intelligence, should dispose one's mind, after training it, on peace towards all creatures.[757] That man who regards the practice of the virtues enumerated above as the highest duty, as conducive to the happiness of all creatures, and as destructive of all kinds of sorrow, is possessed of the highest knowledge, and succeeds in obtaining happiness. Hence (as already said), one should, exercising one's intelligence, dispose one's mind, after training it, on peace towards all creatures. One should never think of doing evil to others. One should not covet what is far above one's power to attain. One should not turn one's thoughts towards objects that are non-existent. One should, on the other hand, direct one's mind towards knowledge by such persistent efforts as are sure to succeed.[758] With the aid of the declarations of the Srutis and of persistent efforts calculated to bring success, that Knowledge is sure to flow. One that is desirous of saying good words or observing a religion that is refined of all dross, should utter only truth that is not fraught with any malice or censure. One that is possessed of a sound heart should utter words that are not fraught with dishonesty, that are not harsh, that are not cruel, that are not evil, and that are not characterised by garrulity. The universe is bound in speech. If disposed to renunciation (of all worldly objects) then should one proclaim,[759] which a mind fraught with humility and a cleansed understanding, one's own evil acts.[760] He who betakes himself to action, impelled thereto by propensities fraught with the attribute of Passion, obtains much misery in this world and at last sinks into hell. One should, therefore, practise self-restraint in body, speech, and mind. Ignorant persons bearing the burdens of the world are like robbers laden with their booty of straggling sheep (secreted from herds taken out for pasture). The latter are always regardful of roads that are unfavourable to them (owing to the presence of the king's watch).[761] Indeed, as robbers have to throw away their spoil if they wish for safety, even so should a person cast off all acts dictated by Passion and Darkness if he is to obtain felicity. Without doubt, a person that is without desire, free from the bonds of the world, contented to live in solitude, abstemious in diet, devoted to penances and with senses under control, that has burnt all his sorrows by (the acquisition of) knowledge, that takes a pleasure in practising all the particulars of yoga discipline, and that has a cleansed soul, succeeds, in consequence of his mind being withdrawn into itself, in attaining to Brahma or Emancipation.[762] One endued with patience and a cleansed soul, should, without doubt, control one's understanding. With the understanding (thus disciplined), one should next control one's mind, and then with the mind overpower the objects of the senses. Upon the mind being thus brought under control and the senses being all subdued, the senses will become luminous and gladly enter into Brahma. When one's senses are withdrawn into the mind, the result that occurs is that Brahma becomes manifested in it. Indeed, when the senses are destroyed, and the soul returns to the attribute of pure existence, it comes to be regarded as transformed into Brahma. Then again, one should never make a display of one's yoga power. On the other hand, one should always exert to restrain one's senses by practising the rules of yoga. Indeed, one engaged in the practice of yoga rules should do all those acts by which one's conduct and disposition may become pure.[763] (Without making one's yoga powers the means of one's subsistence) one should rather live upon broken grains of corn, ripe beans, dry cakes of seeds from which the oil has been pressed out, pot-herbs, half-ripe barley, flour of fried pulses, fruits, and roots, obtained in alms.[764] Reflecting upon the characteristics of time and place, one should according to one's inclinations observe, after proper examination, vows and rules about fasts. One should not suspend an observance that has been begun. Like one slowly creating a fire, one should gradually extend an act that is prompted by knowledge. By doing so, Brahma gradually shines in one like the Sun. The Ignorance which has Knowledge for its resting ground, extends its influence over all the three states (of waking, dreaming and dreamless slumber). The Knowledge, again, that follows the Understanding, is assailed by Ignorance.[765] The evil-hearted person fails to obtain a knowledge of the Soul in consequence of taking it as united with the three states although in reality it transcends them all. When, however, he succeeds in apprehending the limits under which the two, viz., union with the three states and separation from them, are manifested, it is then that he becomes divested of attachment and attains to Emancipation. When such an apprehension has been attained, one transcends the effects of age, rises superior to the consequences of decrepitude and death, and obtains Brahma which is eternal, deathless, immutable, undeteriorating."'"


Footnotes:

755. Compassion may sometimes lead to excess of attachment, as in thecase of Bharata towards his little deer. The universe is the result ofacts because acts determine the character of the life the soul assumes.In the case of Bharata, he was obliged to take birth as a deer in hisnext life in consequence of all his thoughts in the previous life havingbeen centred on a deer.

756. K.P. Singha wrongly translates this verse. Tat should be suppliedbefore asnute; there is redundant va in the first line. The Burdwantranslator renders it correctly.

757. The buddhi here referred to is intelligence cleansed by scriptures.Samahitam manak is, as explained by the commentator, mind freed fromanger and malice, etc., i.e., properly trained.

758. One should not covet, etc., like kingdoms and thrones in the case ofordinary men. "Non-existent objects," such as sons and wives that aredead or that are unborn or unwed.

759. Samsara, as explained by the commentator, means both this and theother world. It is bound in speech in this sense, viz., that whatever isspoken is never destroyed and affects permanently both the speaker andthe listener, so that not only in one life, but in the infinite course oflives, the speaker will be affected for good or for evil by the wordsthat escape his lips. This fully accords with the discovery of modernscience, so eloquently and poetically enunciated by Babbage, of theindestructibility of force or energy when once applied. How appalling isthe sanction (which is not a myth) under which evil speaking is forbidden.

760. Such self-disclosure destroys the effects of those acts and preventstheir recurrence.

761. Robbers laden with booty are always in danger of seizure. Even sounintelligent men bearing the burdens of life are always liable todestruction.

762. Nishpraiharena means Niruddhena as explained by the commentator.

763. I adopt the reading prakasela and the interpretation that Nilakanthaputs upon it.

764. K.P. Singha translates these words very carelessly. The Burdwantranslator, by following the commentator closely, has produced a correctversion. Kulmasha means ripe grains or seeds of the Phaselous radiatus.Pinyaka is the cake of mustard seed or sesamum after the oil has beenpressed out. Yavaka means unripe barley, or, as the commentator explains,raw barley powdered and boiled in hot water.

765. What is meant by the first line of the verse is this. The Soul had,before the creation, only Knowledge for its attribute. When Ignorance orDelusion, proceeding from Supreme Brahma, took possession of it, the Soulbecame an ordinary creature, i.e., consciousness, mind, etc., resulted.This Ignorance, therefore, established itself upon Knowledge andtransformed the original character of the Soul. What is stated in thesecond line is that ordinary knowledge which follows the lead of theunderstanding is affected by ignorance, the result of which is that theSoul takes those things that really spring from itself to be thingsdifferent from itself and possessing an independent existence.