SECTION 238

"'"Vyasa said, 'These, then, are the obligatory acts ordained for Brahmanas. One possessed of knowledge always attains to success by going through (the prescribed) acts. If no doubt arises in respect of acts, then acts done are sure to lead to success. The doubt to which we refer is this: whether acts are obligatory or whether they are optional.[936] As regards this (doubt about the true character of acts, it should be said that), if acts are ordained for man for inducing knowledge (by which alone Brahma or Emancipation is to be attained, even then) they should be regarded as obligatory (and not optional). I shall now discourse on them by the light of inferences and experience. Listen to me.[937] With respect to acts some men say that Exertion is their cause. Others say that Necessity is their cause. Others, again, maintain that Nature is the cause. Some say that acts are the result of both Exertion and Necessity. Some maintain that acts flow from Time, Exertion, and Nature. Some say that of the three (viz., Exertion, Necessity, and Nature), one only (and not the other two) is the cause. Some are of opinion that all the three combined are the cause.[938] Some persons that are engaged in the performance of acts say, with respect to all objects, that they exist, that they do not exist, that they cannot be said to exist, that they cannot be said not to exist, that it is not that they cannot be said to exist, and lastly, that it is not that they cannot be said not to exist. (These then are the diverse views entertained by men). They, however, that are Yogins, behold Brahma to be the universal cause. The men of the Treta, the Dwapara, and the Kali Yugas are inspired with doubts. The men, however, of the Krita Yuga are devoted to penances, possessed of tranquil souls, and observant of righteousness.[939] In that age all men regard the Richs, the Samans, and the Yajuses as identical not withstanding their apparent diversity. Analysing desire and aversion, they worship only penance.[940] Devoted to the practice of penances, steadfast in them, and rigid in their observance, one obtains the fruition of all desires by penances alone. By penance one attains to that by becoming which one creates the universe. By penance one becomes that in consequence of which one becomes the puissant master of all things.[941] That Brahma has been expounded in the declarations of the Vedas. For all that, Brahma is inconceivable by even those that are conversant with those declarations. Once more has Brahma been declared in the Vedanta. Brahma, however, cannot be beheld by means of acts.[942] The sacrifice ordained for Brahmans consists in japa (meditation and recitation), that for Kshatriyas consists in the slaughter of (clean) animals for the gratification of the deities; that for Vaisyas consists in the production of crops and the keep of domestic animals; and that for Sudras in menial service of the three other orders. By observing the duties laid down for him and by studying the Vedas and other scriptures, one becomes a Dwija (regenerate). Whether one does any other act or not, one becomes a Brahmana by becoming the friend of all creatures.[943] In the beginning of Treta, the Vedas and sacrifices and the divisions of caste and the several modes of life existed in their entirety. In consequence, however, of the duration of life being decreased in Dwapara, those are overtaken by decline. In the Dwapara age as also in the Kali, the Vedas are overtaken by perplexity. Towards the close of Kali again, it is doubtful if they ever become even visible to the eye.[944] In that age, the duties of the respective order disappear, and men become afflicted by iniquity. The juicy attributes of kine, of the earth, of water, and (medicinal and edible) herbs, disappear.[945] Through (universal) iniquity the Vedas disappear and with them all the duties inculcated in them as also the duties in respect of the four modes of life. They who remain observant of the duties of their own order become afflicted, and all mobile and immobile objects undergo a change for the worse.[946] As the showers of heaven cause all products of the earth to grow, after the same manner the Vedas, in every age, cause all the angas to grow.[947] Without doubt, Time assumes diverse shapes. It has neither beginning nor end. It is Time which produces all creatures and again devours them. I have already spoken of it to thee. Time is the origin of all creatures; Time is that which makes them grow; Time is that which is their destroyer; and lastly it is time that is their ruler. Subject to pairs of opposites (such as heat and cold, pleasure and pain, etc.), creatures of infinite variety rest on Time according to their own natures (without being otherwise than how they have been ordained by supreme Brahma).'"'"[948]


Footnotes:

936. Whether karma is swabhava or jnanam means (as the commentatorexplains) whether it is obligatory or optional. Jnanam, of course, meanshere jnana-janakam, i.e., leading to knowledge. Knowledge is essential tosuccess or emancipation. If acts become necessary for leading toknowledge, the doubt may then arise that they cease to be obligatory, forknowledge may be supposed to be attainable otherwise than by acts. K.P.Singha translates this verse correctly, the Burdwan translatorincorrectly, and, as usual, misunderstands the gloss completely.

937. The first line of this verse is exceedingly terse. The construction,as explained by the commentator, is Tatra (samsaye) purusham prati Jnanam(jnanajanakam) chet (karma) syat, (tarhi) sa (eva) Vedavidhih. One cannothelp admiring Nilakantha for his patience and ingenuity.

938. Daiva is explained by the commentator as Grahah or Kalah. I think,it is used to signify some kind of blind force whose origin isuntraceable. Hence, I render it necessity. Vritti in verse 5 is evidentlyExertion, for the word implies course of conduct, Avivekam issamuchchayam or a combination of all the three.

939. 'Inspired with doubt,' with reference to the declarations of theSrutis. 'Possessed of tranquil souls,' i.e., not penetrated by doubts ofany kind.

940. In the Treta and the other Yugas people are seen professingattachment or devotion to one only of the Vedas and not to the others, beit the Richs, the Samans, or the Yajuses. The speaker, dissatisfied withthis refers to the Krita age as one in which such difference of faithwere not observable. The men of that age regarded all the Vedas equally,and, in fact, as even identical.

941. Jiva or Chit becomes puissant and succeeds in creating the universeby means of penance. By penance one attains to Brahma, and, therefore,universal puissance. This has been sufficiently explained in the previoussections.

942. This is one of the most important verses in this section, for, asthe commentator explains, this furnishes the answer to the questionproposed in the previous section, viz., 'what is that knowledge?' In theVedas both acts and knowledge have been spoken of. In the province ofacts, Brahma has been represented as Indra and the other gods. Brahma,therefore, as spoken of there, is 'gahana', or hidden to (orinconceivable by) even those that are conversant with that province orsphere of the Vedas. In the Vedanta, again, knowledge or Vidya has beenspoken of as the means by which to attain to Brahma. The knowledge orVidya, therefore, which is the subject of the question, is not what isimplied by Pravritti dharma or by Nivritti as used in the previoussection.

943. The second line of this verse corresponds with the second line ofverse 87 of Chapter II of Manusmriti.

944. They are seen and not seen is an idiomatic expression for 'becominginvisible.'

945. i.e., kine do not yield copious and sweet milk; the soil ceases tobe fertile; water ceases to be sweet; and the medicinal and edible herbslose their virtues of healing as also their flavour.

946. The commentator thinks that Swadharmasthah is connected with asramahin the first line. I prefer the more obvious construction.

947. Varshati means pushnati. Angani means the observances necessary forthe practice of Yoga as also all kinds of rites and vows. The Vedas causethese to grow, and they, in their turn, aid all students of the Vedas inachieving their purposes.

948. Prabhavah is uttpattih, or origin; sthanam is poshanam. Both theVernacular translators skip over the last word, thinking thatprabhavasthanam, is one word. The commentator notices them as separate.In the beginning of the second line, yatra is understood, Swabhavena, isexplained by the commentator as Brahmabhavena, natu vikritena rupena. Ithink the explanation is correct, and have adopted it accordingly in thetext.