SECTION 253

"'"Vyasa said, 'Those that are conversant with the scriptures behold, with the aid of acts laid down in the scriptures, the Soul which is clothed in a subtile body and is exceedingly subtile and which is dissociated from the gross body in which it resides.[1087] As the rays of the Sun that course in dense masses through every part of the firmament are incapable of being seen by the naked eye though their existence is capable of being inferred by reason, after the same manner, existent beings freed from gross bodies and wandering in the universe are beyond the ken of human vision.[1088] As the effulgent disc of the Sun is beheld in the water in a counter-image, after the same manner the Yogin beholds within gross bodies the existent self in its counter-image.[1089] All those souls again that are encased in subtile forms after being freed from the gross bodies in which they resided, are perceptible to Yogins who have subjugated their senses and who are endued with knowledge of the soul. Indeed, aided by their own souls, Yogins behold those invisible beings. Whether asleep or awake, during the day as in the night, and during the night as in day time, they who apply themselves to Yoga after casting off all the creations of the understanding and the Rajas born of acts, as also the very puissance that Yoga begets, succeed in keeping their linga form under complete control.[1090] The Jiva that dwells in such Yogins, always endued with the seven subtile entities (viz., Mahat, consciousness, and the five tanmatras of the five elemental entities), roves in all regions of bliss, freed from decrepitude and death. I say "always", and "freed from death" only in accordance with the common form of speech, for in reality, that linga form is terminable.[1091] That man, however, who (without having been able to transcend them) is under the influence of his mind and understanding, discriminates, even in his dreams, his own body from that of another and experiences (even then) both pleasure and pain.[1092] Yes, in even his dreams he enjoys happiness and suffers misery; and yielding to wrath and cupidity, meets with calamities of various kinds. In his dreams he acquires great wealth and feels highly gratified, accomplishes meritorious acts, and (sees and hears, etc.) as he does in his wakeful hours. Wonderful it is to note that jiva, which has to lie within the uterus and amid much internal heat, and which has to pass a period of full ten months in that place, is not digested and reduced to destruction like food within the stomach. Men overwhelmed by the qualities of Rajas and Tamas never succeed in beholding within the gross body the Jiva-soul which is a portion of the Supreme Soul of transcendent effulgence and which lies within the heart of every creature. They who betake themselves to the science of Yoga for the purpose of obtaining (a knowledge) of that Soul transcending the inanimate and gross body, the imperceptible linga body, and the karana body that is not destroyed on the occasion of even the universal destruction.[1093] Amongst the duties that have been laid down for the different modes of life including the fourth mode (or Sannyasa), these to which I have adverted, which have yoga for their foremost, and which imply a cessation of every operation of the Mind and the understanding, have been laid down by Sandilya (in the Chandogya Upanishad).[1094] Having comprehended the seven subtile entities (viz., the senses, the objects of the mind, Mind, Understanding, Mahat, Unmanifest or Prakriti, and Purusha), having comprehended also the Supreme cause of the universe with the six attributes (viz., omniscience, contentment, unlimited comprehension, independence, eternal wakefulness, and omnipotence), and lastly having understood that the universe is only a modification of Avidya endued with the three qualities, one succeeds in beholding (guided by the scriptures), high Brahma.'"'"[1095]


Footnotes:

1087. 'Conversant with the scriptures,' i.e., Yogin; 'acts laid down inthe scriptures' are the practices connected with Yoga. Saririnam, thecommentator takes, implies the Soul as invested with a subtile body; ofcourse, Saririn as distinguished from Sariram generally means the Soul orthe owner of the Sariram without reference to the body. Hence, the wordcannot be taken as referring to the Soul as uninvested with thelingasarira.

1088. I follow the commentator in his exposition of this verse. Sahitahis nividah; drisyamanah is explained as 'though unseen by the eye is yetrealised through instruction and by the aid of reason.'

1089. Tapah is rasmi-mandalam. Prati-rupam is pratyupa-dhi. Sattwam issattwapradhanalingam. The sense, in simple words, seems to be that theYogin beholds within his own body and those of others the Souls or Chitsresiding there as invested in subtile forms.

1090. Both atmachintitam and karmajam rajas are governed by Jahatam. Thefirst means all that is: 'kalpitah in self' i.e., the creations of theunderstanding or the mind, implying, of course, the objects of the sensesor the external world. The second means kamadi vyasanam, i.e., thecalamities constituted by desire, etc. Pradhanadwaidhamuktah is one whois freed from identity with Pradhana or the Universal cause; hence, thepuissance that Yoga brings about. Such Yogins have their subtile formsunder complete control under all conditions and at all times. They canenter at will into other forms. Sattwatma is linga-dehah.

1091. Satatam qualifies anwitah. Nityam qualifies charishnuh. Sadanityahis explained by the commentator as in reality terminable, though thewords always etc., have been used. The plain meaning of the verse is thatYogins, in their linga body, rove everywhere, not excluding the mostblissful regions in heaven itself.

1092. The meaning is this: like Yogins, ordinary men even have thelinga-sariram. In dreams, the gross body is inactive. Only the subtilebody acts and feels. The Burdwan translator misunderstands this versecompletely.

1093. Atikramanti is understood at the end of the verse. Vajropamani isexplained by the commentator as 'so undying that they are not destroyedat even the universal destruction; hence, of course, the karana bodies.'The karana bodies are the potentialities, existing in the tanmatra of theelemental substances, of forming diverse kinds of linga bodies inconsequence of the acts of Jiva in previous periods of existence.

1094. Etat is: maduktam vakyam; yogam implies yogapradhanam. Samadhausamam has reference to 'yogam.' What the speaker wishes to say inthis verse is that dhyana is not laid down for Sannyasins alone but it islaid down for all others as well.

1095. Pradhanam is Avidya or Ignorance. Viniyoga is Viparinama. Theparticle anu always interpreted as 'following' the scriptures or somespecial branch of knowledge that treats of the subject spoken of.