SECTION 280

"'"Usanas said, 'I bow to that divine and illustrious and puissant Being who holds this earth with the firmament in his arms. I shall speak to thee of the pre-eminent greatness of that Vishnu whose head, O best of the Danavas, is that Infinite place (called Emancipation).'

"'"While they were thus conversing with each other there came unto them the great sage Sanatkumara of righteous soul for the purpose of dispelling their doubts. Worshipped by the prince of Asuras and by the sage Usanas, that foremost of sages sat down on a costly seat. After Kumara of great wisdom had been seated (at his ease), Usanas said unto him, 'Discourse to this chief of the Danavas on the pre-eminent greatness of Vishnu.' Hearing these words, Sanatkumara uttered the following, fraught with grave import, upon the pre-eminent greatness of Vishnu unto the intelligent chief of the Danavas, 'Listen, O Daitya, to everything about the greatness of Vishnu. Know, O scorcher of foes, that the entire universe rests on Vishnu. O thou of mighty arms, it is He who creates all creatures mobile and immobile. In course of Time it is He, again, who withdraws all things and in Time it is He who once more casts them forth from Himself. Into Hari all things merge at the universal destruction and from Him all things again come forth. Men possessed of scriptural lore cannot obtain him by such lore. Nor can He be obtained by Penances, nor by Sacrifices. The only means by which He can be attained is by restraining the Senses. Not that sacrifices are entirely useless towards such an end. For one, by relying upon both external and internal acts, and upon one's own mind, can purify (them) by one's own understanding. By such means, one succeeds in enjoying infinity in the world.[1353] As a goldsmith purifies the dross of his metal by repeatedly casting it into the fire with very persistent efforts of his own, after the same manner Jiva succeeds in cleaning himself by his course through hundreds of births. Some one may be seen to purify himself in only one life by mighty efforts. As one should with care wipe stains from off one's person before they become thick, after the same manner one should, with vigorous efforts, wash off one's faults.[1354] By mixing only a few flowers with them, grains of sesame cannot be made to cast off their own odour (and become at once fragrant). After the same manner, one cannot, by cleansing one's heart only a little, succeed in beholding the Soul. When, however, those grains are perfumed repeatedly with the aid of a large quantity of flowers, it is then that they cast off their own odour and assume that of the flowers with which they are mixed. After this manner, faults, in the form of attachments to all our environments, are dispelled by the understanding in course of many lives, with the aid of a large dose of the attribute of the Sattwa, and by means of efforts born of practice.[1355] Listen, O Danava, by what means creatures attached to acts and those unattached to them attain the causes that lead to their respective states of mind.[1356] Listen to me with undivided attention. I shall, in their due order, discourse to thee, O puissant Danava, as to how creatures betake themselves to action and how they give up action.[1357] The Supreme Lord creates all creatures mobile and immobile. He is without beginning and without end. Unendued with attributes of any kind, he assumes attributes (when he chooses to create). He is the universal Destroyer, the Refuge of all things, the Supreme Ordainer, and pure Chit.[1358] In all creatures it is He who dwells as the mutable and the immutable. It is He who, having eleven modifications for His essence, drinketh this universe with His rays.[1359] Know that the Earth is His feet. His head is constituted by Heaven. His arms, O Daitya, are the several points of the compass or the horizon. The intermediate space is His ears. The light of His eye is the Sun, and His mind is in the Moon. His understanding dwells always in Knowledge, and His tongue is in Water.[1360] O best of Danavas, the Planets are in the midst of His brows. The stars and constellations are from the light of His eyes. The Earth is in His feet, O Danava! Know also that the attributes of Rajas, Tamas, and Sattwa are of Him. He is the fruit (or end) of all the modes of life, and He it is who should be known as the fruit (or reward) of all (pious) acts (such as Japa and Sacrifice, etc.).[1361] The Highest and Immutable, He is also the fruit of abstention from all work. The Chandas are the hair on His body, and Akshara (or Pranava) is His word. The diverse orders (of men) and the modes of life are His refuge. His mouths are many. Duty (or religion) is planted in his heart. He is Brahma; He is the highest Righteousness; He is Sat and He is Asat;[1362] He is Sruti; He is the scriptures; He is the Sacrificial vessel; He is the six and ten Ritwijes; He is all the Sacrifices; He is the Grandsire (Brahman); He is Vishnu; He is the twin Aswins; and He is Purandara;[1363] He is Mitra; He is Varuna; He is Yama; He is Kuvera the lord of treasures. Although the Ritwijes seem to behold Him as separate, He is, however, known to them as one and the same. Know that this entire universe is under the control of One divine Being.[1364] The Veda that is in the soul, O prince of Daityas, regards the unity of various creatures. When a living creature realises this unity in consequence of true knowledge, he is then said to attain to Brahma. The period of time for which one creation exists or for which it ceases to exist is called a Kalpa. Living creatures exist for a thousand millions of such Kalpas. Immobile creatures also exist for an equal period. The period for which a particular creation exists is measured by many thousands of lakes (in the following way), O Daitya! Conceive a lake that is one Yojana in width, one Krosa in depth, and five hundred Yojanas in length. Imagine many thousands of such lakes. Seek then to dry up those lakes by taking from them, only once a day, as much water as may be taken up with the end of a single hair. The number of days would pass in drying them up completely by this process represents the period that is occupied by the life of one creation from its first start to the time of its destruction.[1365] The highest Evidence (for all things) says that creatures have six colours, viz., Dark, Tawny, Blue, Red, Yellow, and White. These colours proceed from mixtures in various proportions of the three attributes of Rajas, Tamas, and Sattwa. Where Tamas predominates, Sattwa falls below the mark, and Rajas keeps to the mark, the result is the colour called Dark. When Tamas predominates as before, but the relations between Sattwa and Rajas are reversed, the result is the colour called Tawny. When Rajas predominates, Sattwa falls below the mark, and Tamas keeps to the mark, the result is the colour called Blue. When Rajas predominates as before and the proportion is reversed between Sattwa and Tamas, the result is the intermediate colour called Red. That Colour is more agreeable (than the preceding one). When Sattwa predominates, Rajas falls below the mark and Tamas keeps to the mark, the result is the colour called Yellow. It is productive of happiness. When Sattwa predominates and the proportion is reversed between Rajas and Tamas, the result is the colour called White. It is productive of great happiness.[1366] The White is the foremost colour. It is sinless in consequence of its being free from attachment and aversion. It is without grief, and free from the toil involved in Pravritti. Hence, White, O prince of Danavas, leads to success (or Emancipation). Jiva, O Daitya, having undergone thousands of births derived through the womb, attains to success.[1367] That success is the identical end which the divine Indra declared after having studied many auspicious spiritual treatises and which has for its essence the apprehension of the Soul. The end again that creatures obtain is dependent on their colour, and colour, in its turn, depends upon the character of the Time that sets in, O Daitya![1368] The stages of existence, O Daitya, through which Jiva must pass are not unlimited. They are fourteen hundreds of thousands in number. In consequence of them Jiva ascends, stays, and falls down as the case may be.[1369] The end that is attained by a Jiva of dark hue is very low, for he becomes addicted to acts that lead to hell and then has to rot in hell.[1370] The learned say that in consequence of his wickedness, the continuance (in such form) of a Jiva is measured by many thousands of Kalpas.[1371] Having passed many hundred thousands of years in that condition, Jiva then attains to the colour called Tawny (and becomes born as an intermediate creature). In that condition he dwells (for many long years), in perfect helplessness. At last when his sins are exhausted (in consequence of his having endured all the misery they are capable of bringing), his mind, casting off all attachments, cherishes Renunciation.[1372] When Jiva becomes endued with the quality of Sattwa, he then dispels everything connected with Tamas by the aid of his intelligence, and exerts (for achieving what is for his good). As the result of this, Jiva attains to the colour called Red. If the quality of Sattwa, however, be not gained, Jiva then travels in a round of rebirths in the world of men, having attained to the colour called Blue.[1373] Having attained to that end (viz., Humanity) and having been afflicted for the duration of one creation by the bonds born of his own acts, Jiva then attains to the colour called Yellow (or becomes a Deity). Existing in that condition for the space of a hundred creations, he then leaves it (for becoming a human being) to return to it once more.[1374] Having attained to the Yellow colour, Jiva exists for thousands of Kalpas, sporting as a Deva. Without, however, being emancipated (even then), he has to stay in hell, enjoying or enduring the fruits of his acts of past Kalpas and wandering through nine and ten thousand courses.[1375] Know that Jiva becomes freed from the hell (of acts) as represented by heaven or godship. After the same manner, Jiva gets off from the other births (corresponding with the other colours). Jiva sports for many long Kalpas in the world of Devas. Falling thence, he once more obtains the status of Humanity. He then stays in that condition for the space of a hundred and eight Kalpas. He then attains once more to the status of a Deva. If while in the status of humanity (for the second time) he falleth through (evil acts as represented by) Kala (in the form of Kali), he then sinks into the Dark colour and thus occupies the very lowest of all stages of existence.

"'"'I shall tell thee now, O foremost of Asuras, how Jiva succeeds in effecting his Emancipation. Desirous of Emancipation, Jiva, relying upon seven hundred kinds of acts every one of which is characterised by a predominance of the attribute of Sattwa, gradually courses through Red and Yellow and at last attains to White. Arrived here, Jiva travels through several regions that are most adorable and that have the Eight well-known regions of felicity beneath them, and all the while pursues that stainless and effulgent form of existence which is Emancipation's self.[1376] Know that the Eight (already referred to and) which are identical with the Sixty (subdivided into) hundreds, are, unto those that are highly effulgent, only creations of the mind (without having any real or independent existence). The highest object of acquisition with one that is White of hue, is that condition (called Turiya) which transcends the three other states of consciousness, viz., Wakefulness and Dream and Dreamless slumber.[1377] As regards that Yogin who is unable to abandon the felicities that Yoga-puissance brings about, he has to dwell (in one and the same body) for one century of Kalpas in auspiciousness and after that in four other regions (called Mahar, Jana, Tapas, and Satya). Even that is the highest end of one belonging to the sixth colour, and who is unsuccessful though crowned with success, and who has transcended all attachments and passions.[1378] That Yogin, again, who falls off from Yoga practices after having attained the measure of eminence described already resides in heaven for a century of Kalpas with the unexhausted remnant of his past acts (to be exhausted by enjoyment or endurance as the case may be), and with the seven (viz., the five senses of knowledge and mind and understanding) purged of all stains in consequence of their predisposition or proneness towards the attribute of Sattwa. At the expiry of that period, such a person has to come to the world of men where he attains to great eminence.[1379] Turning back from the world of men, he departs for attaining to new forms of existence that run higher and higher in the upward scale. While engaged in this, he courseth through seven regions for seven times, his puissance being always increased in consequence of his Samadhi and the re-awakening from it.[1380] The Yogin who is desirous of final Emancipation suppresses by Yoga-knowledge the seven, and continues to dwell in the world of life, freed from attachments; and taking those seven for certain means of grief, he casts them off and attains afterwards to that state which is Indestructible and Infinite. Some say that that is the region of Mahadeva; some, of Vishnu; some, of Brahman; some, of Sesha; some, of Nara; some, of the effulgent Chit; and some, of the All-pervading.[1381] When universal destruction comes, those persons who have succeeded in completely consuming by Knowledge their gross and subtle and karana bodies, always enter into Brahma. All their Senses also which have action for their essence and which are not identical with Brahma, merge into the same. When the time of universal destruction comes, those Jivas who have attained to the position of Devas and who have an unexhausted remnant of the fruits of acts to enjoy or endure, revert to those stages of life in the subsequent Kalpa which had been theirs in the previous one. This is due to the similarity of every successive Kalpa to every previous one. Those again whose acts, at the time of universal destruction, have been exhausted by enjoyment or endurance in respect of their fruits, falling down from heaven, take birth among men, in the subsequent Kalpa, for without Knowledge one cannot destroy one's acts in even a hundred Kalpas. All superior Beings again, endued with similar powers and similar forms, revert to their respective destinies at a new creation after a universal destruction, ascending and descending precisely in the same manner as during the creation that is dissolved.[1382] As regards, again, the person who is conversant with Brahma, as long as he continues to enjoy and endure the unexhausted remnant of his acts of previous Kalpas, it is said that all creatures and the two stainless sciences live in his body. When his Chitta becomes cleansed by Yoga, and when he practises Samyama, this perceptible universe appears to him as only his own fivefold senses.[1383] Enquiring with a cleansed mind, Jiva attains to a high and stainless end. Thence he attains to a spot which knows no deterioration, and thence attains to eternal Brahma that is so difficult of acquisition.[1384] Thus, O thou of great might, I have discoursed to thee of the eminence of Narayana!'

"'"Vritra said, 'These words of thine, I see, perfectly according with the truth. Indeed, when this is so, I have no (cause of grief). Having listened to thy words, O thou of great powers of mind, I have become freed from sorrow and sin of every kind. O illustrious Rishi, O holy one, I see this wheel of Time, endued with mighty energy, of the most effulgent and Infinite Vishnu, has been set in motion. Eternal is that station, from which all kinds of creation spring. That Vishnu is the Supreme Soul. He is the foremost of Beings. In Him this entire universe rests.'"

"'Bhishma continued, "Having said these words, O son of Kunti, Vritra cast off his life-breaths, uniting his soul (in Yoga, with the supreme Soul), and attained to the highest station."

"'Yudhishthira said, "Tell me, O grandsire, whether this Janardana (Krishna) is that illustrious and puissant Lord of whom Sanatkumara spoke unto Vritra in days of old."

"'Bhishma said, "The Highest Deity, endued with the six attributes of (puissance, etc.) is at the Root. Staying there, the Supreme Soul, with his own energy, creates all these diverse existent things.[1385] Know that this Kesava who knows no deterioration is from His eighth portion. Endued with the highest Intelligence, it is this Kesava who creates the three worlds with an eighth portion (of His energy). Coming immediately after Him who lies at the Root, this Kesava who is eternal (compared with all other existent things), changes at the end of each Kalpa. He, however, who lies at the Root and who is endued with supreme might and puissance, lies in the waters when universal destruction comes (in the form of the potential Seed of all things). Kesava is that Creator of pure Soul who courseth through all the eternal worlds.[1386] Infinite and Eternal as He is, He fills all space (with emanations from Himself) and courseth through the universe (in the form of everything that constitutes the universe). Freed as He is from limitations of every kind such as the possession of attributes would imply, he suffers himself to be invested with Avidya and awakened to Consciousness, Kesava of Supreme Soul creates all things. In Him rests this wondrous universe in its entirety."

"'Yudhishthira said, "O thou that art conversant with the highest object of knowledge, I think that Vritra saw beforehand the excellent end that awaited him. It is for this, O grandsire, that he was happy and did not yield to grief (in view of his coming Death). He who is White of hue, who has taken birth in a pure or stainless race, and who has attained to the rank of a Sadhya, doth not, O sinless one, come back (into the world for re-birth). Such a person, O grandsire, is freed from both hell and the status of all intermediate creatures. He, however, who has attained to either the Yellow or the Red hue, is seen sometimes to be overwhelmed by Tamas and fall among the order of Intermediate creatures. As regards ourselves, we are exceedingly afflicted and attached to objects that are productive of sorrow or indifference or joy. Alas, what will the end be to which we shall attain? Will it be the Blue or the Dark which is the lowest of all hues?"

"'Bhishma continued, "Ye are Pandavas. Ye have been born in a stainless race. Ye are of rigid vows. Having sported in joy in the regions of the gods, ye shall come back to the world of men. Living happily as long as the creation lasts, all of you at the next new creation will be admitted among the gods, and enjoying all kinds of felicities ye will at last be numbered among the Siddhas. Let no fear be yours. Be you cheerful."'"


Footnotes:

1353. Vaya acts are, of course, sacrifices and other religious acts; byabhyantara acts are meant santi, danti, uparati, titiksha, and samadhi,i.e., the usual course of mental training necessary for Yoga. What thespeaker intends to lay down in this verse is that sacrifices are notentirely useless. These may lead to chitta-suddhi or the cleansing of theheart, which, when attained, leads to knowledge of Him or the Soul or toEmancipation or Infinity.

1354. The comparison lies in the fact of the desirability of the twoacts. No one likes the stains the body may catch to remain unwashed orunwiped off. Similarly, no one should neglect to wash off the faults thatthe heart may catch. There is no comparison between the two acts withregard to the degree of effort necessary to accomplish each.

1355. 'Efforts born of practice' refer to both external and internalSadhana.

1356. Karmaviseshan is explained by the commentator as equivalent toragaviraga-hetun.

1357. Sampravartante and tishthanti are thus explained by the commentator.

1358. In the previous verses the speaker describes the training that oneshould undergo. In this and the following ones, he speaks of the objectto be known. Sreeman is explained as asriyate iti srih, i.e., upadhih,tadvan. Hari is Sambharata. Narayana is saravasrayah. Prabhu issarvaniyanta. Deva is dyotate-iti i.e., Chinmatrah. These etymologiesmust be grasped for understanding this verse.

1359. The 'mutable' in all creatures is the combination of the fiveprimal essences. The 'immutable' in them is Jiva, or Chit as investedwith ignorance. The eleven modifications that constitute. His essence arethe eleven senses of knowledge and action with the mind. Equipped withthese eleven. He drinketh the universe, i.e., enjoys it. The rays arethese senses themselves. Equipped with the senses. He enjoys the universewith the senses.

1360. 'His mind is _in_ the Moon.' i.e., His mind is the Moon. Theexpression 'waters in the Ganges,' implies a distinction that does notexist between container and contained, for 'Ganges,' means the water sonamed.

1361. The sandhi between sa and acramanam is arsha.

1362. Dharma has various meanings all of which, however, are closelycreated with one another. As duty, or the assemblage of all acts which weshould do, it is both Righteousness and Religion.

1363. The Sacrificial grahas or patras (vessels) are called after thenames of the deities Indra, Vayu, Soma, etc. The sixteen Ritwijes areBrahman, Hotri, Adhyaryu, Udgatri, etc.

1364. Verse 21 to 23 show the unity of the Divine Being. The varietyperceived is only apparent, not real.

1365. Verse 31 and 32 are not difficult; yet the Burdwan translator makesnonsense of the same.

1366. This is elaborated in the Vishnu Purana, Part I, Sec. V. There arethree primary creations, viz., Mahat, the five primal essences in theirsubtile forms and the senses. From the Six colours again six othercreations have sprung. To the Dark colour is due all immobile creatures;to the Tawny all the intermediate order of creatures (viz., the loweranimals and birds, etc.); to the Blue are due human beings, to the Redthe Prajapatyas; to the Yellow the deities; and to the White are due theKumara, i.e., Sanatkumara and others.

1367. Emancipation is so difficult.

1368. The construction of the first line is this: subham darsanam(auspicious scriptures) gatwa (prapya) Devah yam gatim (identical with)darsanam (atmanubhavatmikam) aha, Gati is naturally dependent on Varna,and Varna upon 'Time or acts.'

1369. There are ten senses of knowledge and action. To this must be addedManas, Buddhi, Ahankara and Chitta, which are sometimes called the fourKaranas. In consequence of these fourteen, fourteen different kinds ormerit and demerit may be achieved by Jiva who is their possessor. Thesefourteen kinds of merit and demerit also, are subdivided into hundreds ofthousands each. Jiva, in course of his wanderings through the universe,ascends in the scale of Being, stays in particular rungs, and falls downfrom them into lower rungs, accordingly, What the speaker wishes toinculcate is that these fourteen should always be towards the attributeof Sattwa or Goodness.

1370. This life, it should be noted, leadeth to Jiva's transformation asan immobile object. A creature of Dark hue becomes addicted to wickedacts and rots in hell His existence as an immobile object is hell itself.

1371. Prajavisargah is the period for which one Creation lasts, beingequal to what is called a Kalpa.

1372. The Dark and the Tawny hues of their corresponding states ofexistence, viz., the immobile and the intermediate, are regarded asstates of endurance. Hence, when the misery that is their portion hasbeen fully endured, the recollection is suddenly irradiated into themind, of the righteousness that distinguished Jiva in ages far remote.Anisa is helpless or cheerless.

1373. Cha at the end of the second line is equivalent to va. Unless chabe taken as equivalent to va the verse would yield no meaning. AfterTawny comes Blue, i.e., after attainment of existence as an Intermediatecreature Jiva attains to humanity. This occurs when Sattwa does notpredominate. Hence anyatha should be supplied after upaiti.

1374. Vyatite is a finite verb in indicative mood, as pointed out by thecommentator. It comes from root i with suffix vi. After sate supply jatesati. The Burdwan translator takes it as a participial adjective in thelocative singular, which is, of course, wrong. The version he gives ofthis line is most ridiculous, containing as it does a self-contradictoryassertion. K. P. Singha gives the right meaning.

1375. When Jiva becomes a Deva, he has still the ten senses, the fivePranas, and the four internal possessions of mind, understanding, Chitta,and Ahankara, amounting in all to nineteen. These nineteen impel him tothousands of acts. Hence, even when transformed into Deva, Jiva is _not_freed from acts, but is in niraya or hell,--acts being, under allcircumstances, equivalent to hell.

1376. Vyuha implies the varied forms of one and the same thing Daivani inSattwa-pradhanani. The five senses, with the mind, the understanding forma total of seven. The acts achieved through each of these may besubdivided a hundredfold. As these seven possessions adhere to Jiva tillhe becomes emancipated, he acts through these seven in a variety of ways,Relying, therefore, upon these seven hundred kinds of acts (which are butvaried forms of one and the same thing, viz., Action), Jiva successivelybecomes Red and Yellow and White. Arrived at White, he courses throughcertain highly effulgent regions which are superior to the region ofBrahman himself, and which leave behind or beneath them the Eight Puris(by which, perhaps, is meant the puri of Indra, that of Varuna, etc., or,Kasi, Mathura, Maya, etc., or symbolical stages of progress, which arefraught with great felicity). Those highly effulgent and adorable regionsare obtainable by Knowledge alone or the fruit of Yoga.

1377. This is an exceedingly abstruse verse. The Burdwan version, inwhich unconnected bits of the commentary have been jumbled together, isutter nonsense. K.P. Singha skips over nearly the whole verse. The Eightpuris referred to in the previous verse are here stated to be identicalwith the Sixty well-known incidents of even Sukla or White existence.This tale of Sixty is arrived at in this way: 1st, the state ofwakefulness; 2nd, the gross body made up of the five primal essences;3rd, the five attributes of sound, scent, form, taste, and touch; thesecome up to seven. Then come the ten senses of action and knowledge; thefive breaths; mind, understanding, consciousness, and chitta: these form

1378. What the speaker wishes to lay down here is that even he that isJivanmukta or has achieved his Emancipation though living like other, isincapable of transcending the effects of his past acts. Every kind ofexistence or life (save that which is identical with Brahma) is anisthaor inauspiciousness. That Yogin who is Jivan-mukta but who is not able tocast off the felicities of Yoga-puissance, resides in one and the samebody for a full century of Kalpas, in a superior form of life, and afterthe expiry, of that century of Kalpas, he passes through four otherregions named Mahar, Jana, Tapas, and Satya. Now, _this_ is the end ofsuch a Yogin, who, of course, belongs to the sixth colour which is White,and who is freed from attachments and who is unsuccessful thoughsuccessful, i.e., who has achieved Yoga-success but who has not stillbeen able to achieve that success which consists in beholding Brahma orBrahma-sakshatkara. By anisah in this verse is meant that Yogin who isincapable of casting off the felicities brought about by Yoga-puissance.K.P. Singha gives the substance of the verse not very accurately. TheBurdwan translator, in the version he gives, introduces three nominativesin the three sentences into which he splits it, viz., Jiva, the Yogin whois unable to cast off the felicities brought about by Yoga-puissance, andthe Yogin who has achieved Brahma-sakshatkara, without understanding thatall three refer to one and the same person.

1379. Anisah here means one who, after having attained to eminence byYoga, falls off from Yoga. Tatra means heaven or the superior regionsthat are his in consequence of Yoga-eminence. For a century of Kalpassuch a person has to dwell in heaven, with the unexhausted remnant of hissenses, i.e., the senses of knowledge with mind and understanding, beingalways predisposed towards the attribute of Sattwa. Upon the expiry ofthat century of Kalpas, such a person, without ascending, descends to theworld of men, but then here eminence of station becomes his.

1380. Saptakritwah is seven times. Paraiti is 'courseth through.' Lokahrefers to the seven regions called respectively, Bhur, Bhuvar, Sivah,Mahar, Jana, Tapas, and Satya (or Brahmaloka). What is intended to besaid here is this: If the Yogin, having attained to only the first stageof Yoga, dies, he ascends to heaven. Thence falling down on Earth, hebecomes an Emperor and thus conquers the Earth or Bhu. In this way, asthe Yogin gradually ascends in the path of Yoga, he ascends higher andhigher. In this verse Sambarevikshepa has been used to signify Samadhiand awakening from Samadhi, for in the first the universe is destroyed,and in the second it is re-created. At the end, he reaches the region ofSatya or Brahma. Thence even he has to return if he has not been able toachieve Brahma-sakshatkara.

1381. The seven that the Yogin desirous of Emancipation casts off areeither the seven regions already referred to viz., Bhu, Bhuva, Swah,Maha, Jana, Tapa, and Satya, or the five senses of knowledge with mindand understanding. Samharam is equivalent to Samhritya, having beenformed by the suffix namul. Upaplavoni are sources of grief ormisfortune. The first Devasya refers to Mahadeva. The Saivas call thatregion Kailasa. The Vaishnavas call it Vaikuntha. The Hiranya-garbhascall it Brahman's or Brahmaloka. Sesha is Ananta, a particular form ofNarayana. They who call it the region of Nara are, of course, theSankhyas, for these regard Emancipation as the goal of Jiva or everycreature. The Devasya vishnoh (in the third line) is DyotamanasyaBrahmanah i.e., Chinmatrasya, or of the pure Chit when uninvested withignorance or Avidya. The Aupanishadas regard it as the region ofPara-Brahma. The commentator clearly points out what the seven regionsare. K.P. Singha, misunderstanding the verse, mentions only five; theBurdwan translator six.

1382. This verse is not at all difficult; yet the Burdwan translatormakes utter nonsense of it. K.P. Singha gives the substance of the firstline, but skips over the second. Without giving a literal version of thefirst line, I expand it, following the lead of the commentator.

1383. Sa here indicates the person conversant with Brahma. Theconstruction is Sa yavat saseshabhuk asti tavat prajah tathaiva te sukledyvyau cha tadangeshu (vartante). Etat in the second line is thisparidrisyamanam viyadadi. What the speaker wishes to inculcate in thisverse is that unto one conversant with Brahma, the whole universe up tocomplete identity with Brahma is as contiguous as a plum in the palm ofthe hand. When the Chitta is cleansed by Yoga as practised by Dhyana,Dharana, and Samadhis, then the perceptible universe appears to him asidentical with his own senses. The two white sciences referred to areParavidya and Aparavidya, i.e., all knowledge including that of Brahma.

1384. Suddhena manasa,--with cleansed mind, i.e., with the aid of Sarvana(hearing), Manana (attention), Dhyana (contemplation), and Abhyasa(repeated meditation). Two stages are indicated in this verse. The firstis the attention of the suddham and paramam gatim or the stainless andhigh end. This is equivalent to Brahma-sakshatkara. After this comes thesecond stage, which is the avayam sthanam or the spot which knows nodeterioration, i.e., Emancipation. This is identical with the attainmentof Eternal Brahma which is dushprapyam or difficult of attainment.

1385. The commentator says that the object of this verse is to inculcatethe Impersonality of God. God is at the Root of all things, i.e., (as thecommentator supposes according to the teaching of the Vedantaphilosophy). He exists in His own unmodified nature, even as pure Chit.Both Vidya (Knowledge) and Avidya (Ignorance or illusion) exist in Him.In consequence of the latter he is Bhagavan, i.e., endued with the sixgrand attributes of puissance, etc.

1386. In the form of all things,--causes and effects--which constitutethem.