SECTION 39

[(Bhagavad Gita Chapter XV)]

"The Holy One said, 'They say that the Aswattha, having its roots above and branches below, is eternal, its leaves are the Chhandas. He who knoweth it, knoweth the Vedas.[279] Downwards and upwards are stretched its branches which are enlarged by the qualities; its sprouts are the objects of senses. Downwards its roots, leading to action, are extended to this world of men.[280] Its form cannot here (below) be thus known, nor (its) end, nor (its) beginning, nor (its) support. Cutting, with the hard weapon of unconcern, this Aswattha of roots firmly fixed, then should one seek for that place repairing whither one returneth not again (thinking)--"I will seek the protection of that Primeval Sire from whom the ancient course of (worldly) life hath flowed."--Those that are free from pride and delusion, that have subdued the evil of attachment, that are steady in the contemplation of the relation of the Supreme to the individual self, from whom desire hath departed, freed from the pairs of opposites known by the names of pleasure and pain (and the like), repair, undeluded, to that eternal seat. The sun lighteth not that [seat], nor the moon, nor fire. Whither going none returneth, that is my supreme seat. An eternal portion of Me is that which, becoming an individual soul in the world of life, draweth to itself the (five) senses with the mind as the sixth which all depend on nature. When the sovereign (of this bodily frame) assumeth or quitteth (a) body, it departeth taking away these, like the wind (taking away) perfumes from their seats. Presiding over the ear, the eye, (the organs of) touch, taste, and smell, and also over the mind, he enjoyeth all objects of senses. They that are deluded do not see (him) when quitting or abiding in (the body), when enjoying or joined to the qualities. They (however) see that have the eye of knowledge.[281] Devotees exerting (towards that end) behold him dwelling in themselves. They (however) that are senseless and whose minds are not restrained, behold him not, even while exerting (themselves).[282] That splendour dwelling in the sun which illumines the vast universe, that (which is) in the moon, and that (which is) in the fire, know that splendour to be mine. Entering into the earth I uphold creatures by my force; and becoming the juicy moon I nourish all herbs.[283] Myself becoming the vital heat (Vaiswanara) residing in the bodies of creatures that breathe, (and) uniting with the upward and the downward life-breaths, I digest the four kinds of food.[284] I am seated in the hearts of all. From Me are memory and knowledge and the loss of both. I am the objects of knowledge to be known by (the aid of) all the Vedas. I am the author of the Vedantas, and I alone am the knower of the Vedas.[285] There are these two entities in the world, viz., the mutable and the immutable. The mutable is all (these) creatures. The unchangeable one is called the immutable.[286] But there is another, the Supreme Being, called Paramatman, who was the Eternal Lord, pervading the three worlds, sustaineth (them) (and) since I transcend the mutable, and am higher than even the immutable; for this I am celebrated in the world (among men) and in the Veda as Purushottama (the Highest Being). He who, without being deluded, knoweth Me as this Highest Being,--he knowing all, O Bharata, worshippeth Me in every way.[287] Thus, O sinless one, hath this knowledge, forming the greatest of mysteries, been declared by Me (to thee). Knowing this, O Bharata, one will become gifted with intelligence, and will have done all he needs do.'"


Footnotes:

279. The 'Aswattha' is the sacred Indian fig tree, here emblematical ofthe course of worldly life. Its roots are above; those roots are theSupreme Being. Its branches are below, these being the inferior deities.Its leaves are the sacred hymns of the Vedas, i.e., as leaves keep thetree alive and even conduce to its fruits, so the Vedas support this treeand lead to salvation.

280. Upwards and downwards i.e., from the highest to the lowest ofcreated things. Enlarged by the qualities, i.e., the qualities appearingas the body, the senses, etc. The sprouts are the objects of sense, beingattached to the senses themselves as sprouts to branches. The rootsextending downwards are the desires for diverse enjoyments. Thus Telang,following the commentators.

281. Joined to the qualities, i.e., perceiving objects of sense orexperiencing pleasure and pain.

282. "Atmani" in the first line is "in the body" as explained bySreedhara and others: "in the understanding" as explained by Sankara. Itseems, however, to be used in the general senses of "themselves", withoutparticular reference to either body or understanding. An Akritatman isone whose soul is not made or formed; generally, "a person of unsubduedpassions."

283. There can be no question that Soma here means the moon and not theSoma juice quaffed in sacrifices, or sap. It is the moon that supports,nourishes all herbs and numerous passages may be quoted from Hindu sacredliterature to show this. Mr. Davies, therefore, clearly errs in renderingSoma as "the savoury juice."

284. The four kinds of food are: that which is masticated, that which issucked, that which is licked, and that which is drunk.

285. Apohanam is loss or removal. It is a well-known word and itsapplication here is very natural. I am memory and knowledge (to thosethat use them for virtuous acts). I am the loss of these faculties (tothose that engage in unrighteous acts). Mr. Davies erroneously renders itas "The power of reason."

286. Kutashtha is rendered by K. T. Telang as "the unconcerned one", byMr. Davies as "the lord on high." I incline to the scholiasts who explainit as "the uniform or the unchangeable one."

287. Sarvabhavena is explained by Sankara by Sarvatma-chintaya (thinkingMe to be the soul of everything). Sreedhara explains it asSarvaprakarena. Why may it not mean "with the whole soul" or "with excessof love."